Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a type of talking therapy where a therapist helps you to change how you think and act. It can treat many different mental health problems. Important: Get urgent help Support is available if you or someone you know is having a mental health crisis or emergency, no matter what you're going through.
Find out where to get urgent help for mental health What CBT is for Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a recommended treatment for many mental health problems, such as:
depression, including postnatal depression
anxiety, including social anxiety, phobias and obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
eating disorders, including anorexia and bulimia
bipolar disorder
personality disorders
CBT can also help with other conditions including:
sleep problems, such as insomnia
problems with alcohol and drugs
long-term pain
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) How to get CBT You can get cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) for free on the NHS for many mental health problems - you do not need to have a diagnosed mental health condition.
There are many ways to get CBT. Waiting times vary depending on where you live.
Refer yourself to NHS talking therapies
For many mental health problems, such as anxiety and depression, you can refer yourself to NHS talking therapies without speaking to a GP.
You must be aged 18 or over (or 16 or over in some areas) to self-refer to NHS talking therapies. Refer yourself to NHS talking therapies Speak to a GP
For some conditions, including eating disorders, bipolar disorder, personality disorders or psychosis, you’ll need a GP to refer you for treatment.
Other ways to get CBT
You may choose to pay for CBT privately, rather than having it on the NHS. You can find an accredited CBT therapist near you on the UK CBT register
.
You may also be able to get CBT for free through your employer, university or local charities. Information: If you’re under 18
Getting CBT on the NHS is different if you’re under 18 (or under 16 in some areas).
Find out more about getting mental health support for children and young people Before you have CBT Once you’ve been referred for cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), you’ll have an assessment with a therapist to decide what the best treatment is for you. This may be done in person, online or on the phone.
The therapist will ask about your symptoms and what you hope to get from treatment.
They’ll then recommend a type of therapy, which may be CBT or another type of therapy, depending on what you need it for. They’ll usually also tell you how long you may need to wait until you get treatment. Information: While you’re waiting for CBT
While you’re waiting for treatment, you might want to try self-help for mental health or self-help CBT techniques on the Every Mind Matters website
. What happens in CBT There are many different types of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). The type you have will depend on why you’re having it and your symptoms.
You can have CBT in different ways including:
guided self-help - going through a workbook or an online course with the help of a therapist
1-to-1 sessions with a therapist
as part of a group - with a therapist and other people who are dealing with a similar issue
CBT can be done in person, online, or on the phone.
You’ll usually have between 5 and 15 sessions of CBT, depending on what you’re having it for.
What CBT sessions involve
In CBT, the main aim is making changes to solve your problems.
In a typical CBT session, you’ll talk about situations you find difficult, and discuss how they make you think, feel and act.
You’ll work with your therapist to work out different ways of approaching these situations. This could include:
questioning unhelpful thoughts and beliefs, and considering other ways of looking at things
noticing your emotions and physical feelings without reacting to them
changing what you do, for example, doing activities you’ve been avoiding
Your therapist will help you find approaches that work for you and the problems you’re having.
You’ll usually be asked to practise what you’ve learned between sessions - it’s important to do this for CBT to work. You may also be asked to record your progress in a worksheet or diary.
After you have CBT
After your course of CBT has finished, it’s important to keep using the skills you’ve learned. Your therapist will usually help you plan how you’ll do this.
If your symptoms do not improve after your first course of CBT, you may be given more sessions.
Speak to a GP if you’re still having problems after your CBT has finished. They might suggest having more CBT or a different type of treatment. Information: Find out more
What is CBT? (British Association for Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapies)
Cognitive behavioural therapy (Mind)
Self-help CBT techniques (Every Mind Matters) More in Talking therapies and counselling Benefits of talking therapies Types of talking therapy Self-help therapies NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression Counselling Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) Page last reviewed: 28 March 2025 Next review due: 28 March 2028
